To learn the concepts of job control we would
need a process that would run for at least
several seconds. So, that we could try to
stop it put it in the background or bring
it to the foreground or even kill it. And
as you start writing programs later on you
may have processes that will be running for
a long time but right now as a beginner you
may need a very easy process that you could
kill without the damage and one such process
is called sleep.
So, look at the main page of the sleep command
it is basically just a delay for a specific
amount of time which is given in seconds.
So, if I type sleep and then say three it
would sleep three seconds and come back to
control. So, you just wait for three seconds
the control will be brought back and the prompt
is available for us to run. So, if you did
that for example for ten seconds then you
will see that for about ten seconds you cannot
do much because the prompt is not available
for you to type anything and you have to wait
for the control to be given back to you.
So, the control has come back. So, what this
implies is that if you have a command that
is running in the foreground for a long time
but you need to have the control back to the
prompt. So, that you can write something else
on the commands line then many options you
may want to kill the process if it was not
important or you may want to suspend the process.
So, that you want to do such another work
and then again bring it back to action by
bringing into the four ground.
So, you could try out of this and you may
even have an option of running a command without
actually losing control of the prompt by keeping
it in the background but executing. So, let
us try those out now I would use the commands
called coprco sleep ten now what happens is
that I have brought the command command prompt
is now back to me and we are able to write
some commandss and as in when the process
is completed you would know because information
is available on the screen to say that that
particular command has been completed.
So, it says that the process has been finished
So, coproc is a command to help you run a
process without actually losing control of
the command prompt to do other activities.
So, when you run a command coproc and let
us sleep and we'll give it for 30 seconds
what happens is that when you type the ps
command. So, you would notice that the sleep
command as a ps command are child processes
of the bash shell and you can now do something
to the sleep command.
So, let us see what is this coporc command
and you would see that there is no manual
page available. So, we need to find out what
type of command that is. So, I type type coproc
I ask and it says that you say shell keyboard
which means that it is a feature provided
by the shell and we have already learned earlier
that to learn more about any shell feature
we should use the help command.
And the help commands definitely gives us
some information it says that create a core
process with the name that is being given
as an argument and it should be run asynchronously
but you are having the control of the prompt
immediately. So, let us launch a command and
then try to kill. So, I launched the sleep
command which is running for thirty seconds
and the process Id is displayed on the screen
but I would also like to inquire it.
So, 9486 is a process Id. So, I can kill it
by using a kill -9486 and you will see that
it would actually lead to killing that process
called sleep thirty. So, if you have a process
that is running and you do not want it to
run if you know the process Id and if you
are the owner of that particular process then
you can go ahead and kill it if it was safe.
Now if you want to run the same process; while
keeping it in the background rather than running
it simultaneously you could do that with an
ampersand sign at the end of the command.
So, if you type like sleep thirty and then
an ampersand it means that you are going to
put this commands in the background. So, now
you see that the command prompt is available
and it also tells you that this particular
command is in the background So, now now you
want to bring it back to the foreground and
you can type fg and it would actually bring
the command which was in the background to
the foreground.
And now it is in the foreground and you do
not have the prompt with you, you will have
to wait for the command to finish and of course
I do not want to wait. So, I could press control
C and kill it. So, when the process is killed
the command prompt is now again available
to us. So, there are two ways of killing the
process one is if it was running in the foreground
you could type control c and if it was running
in the background or in any other shell as
long as you are the owner you could kill it
using the kill command.
So, there are two ways of killing the process
by knowing the process Id. So, therefore the
knowing the process Id is quite important
in managing the processes that are running
on your computer. Nnow you may be curious
to know if in the shell you have launched
a certain processes and you have not paid
attention to them and are they running in
the background still.
So, there is a command called jobs that could
actually tell you if there was any commands
that is running in the background. So, let
me run a processing in the background
and type a commands called jobs and it tells
and it tells that there is a process called
sleep thirty that is running in the background.
I run another command sleep forty five and
it is giving me warming still you could actually
go ahead and do that and you will see that
there are two processes running the background.
And a ps minus minus forest would show you
graphically how those processes are listed
under the bash because bash is the parent
processes the two sleep commandss are the
child processes and of course the ps command
itself is a child process of the bash. And
as soon as the jobs are done you would have
the display on the screen when you press the
enter on the command line as a process of
running various commandss. So, whenever the
command is executed and completed you would
see that the information about that completion
will be displayed on the screen.
So, both the process are now finished. So,
let me then type the jobs combined to see
if there are any jobs in the background and
you see that there is nothing in the background.
So, what is what is this jobs command and
let us look at it? So, that we press control
L to clear the screen and you see that there
is no manual page for that s, our suspicion
would be perhaps it is a shell feature and
as expected is a shell bulletin.
So, we had to then run the command help to
know more about that. I am sure enough there
is some help about the jobs command and you
can see that it is about listing the active
jobs that are running in the current shell.
If you are curious about what are all the
jobs or processes that are running in the
computer there is a very nice commands top
which can tell you what are the processes
sorted in the decreasing sequence of the CPU
utilization.
So, if you type top and you will see that
the screen is going to be refreshed every
couple of seconds and it would show you the
process that is occupying the maximum CPU
utilization on the top. So, if your computer
is not responding well then in a shell you
can actually open this to identify which command
is running and occupying the resources. You
would see that I am recording this particular
video using the OBS studio.
And uh OBS is what is actually occupying 63%t
of the CPU and it is at the top. Now you can
come out of this by pressing q. So, I clear
the string with control L. I can launch the
top command and while it is running I can
press q to come out of it graciously. However
I could also come out of it by pressing control
C. Control C is like interrupting and killing
the process and coming out and we have done
that just now.
So, when I am running this command top you
could also do one more thing you could press
control z. So, what happens when you press
control z or control z is that the pros the
process is suspended. So, if you press ps
then you would see that there is a process
that is still there it is not completed but
it is suspended. Type jobs to see and it says
that there is a job that is stopped and it
is called top and we can do something with
it.
Type fg and it would then come back to the
front and it is again refreshing and working.
Now if you want to come out of it graciously
you would press q and come out of it. Now
what this shows you is that you can actually
suspend a program do something else and then
again bring the suspended program back to
the front and then come out of it elegantly
whenever it finishes. So, this allows you
to be able to switch between tasks while you
are in the command line environment without
actually coming out of the shell.
So, the command that we used to bring the
background job to the foreground was fg. So,
type fg and there is no manual page available
and what type of a command is that is a shell
bulletin we can ask for help of that and it
says that move the job to the foreground.
So, if it was a job that was running in the
background it would be brought to the foreground.
So, it would be an active on the screen.
So, let us just try this out by the command
sleep itself. So, we will type sleep sixty.
So, for one minute and let us say I put an
ampersand here. So, it goes to the background
okay and then I could do some commandss in
between and now I want to bring back that
commands to the foreground I can just type
fg and you see that the sleep sixty is now
in the foreground. And I can now not type
commandss because the prompt is not available.
And let us say I am impatient I do not want
to continue further I can press control z
then it would be stopped and you can see that
the prompt is back to me and I have not killed
the process I have only stopped it just like
suspension and let us say I now give time
for it to finish up the work of sleeping for
sixty seconds. So, I can then type fg and
the job is again back to the foreground.
And let us say I do not want to make it finish
all the time let us say I want to interrupt
this program by using controls the account
interrupted and thereby killing that. Let
us look at the meaning of the shell variable
dollar hyphen which is a very special variable
because it tells you a lot more about the
capabilities of shell that is currently running.
So, depending upon the options that you give
to the shell; while launching it its capabilities
can be limited or expanded.
So, you see that there is something that is
printed on the screen it says h i m capital
B capital H and then small s the meaning of
these is available in the main page for bash
you see that the options here whatever is
after the hyphen symbol are the options that
we can see. So, the sea would mean commands
are to be read from the argument supplied
on the command line after options the I would
mean that it is an interactive shell and so
on.
Let us say we want to see a bash shell with
less number of options configured then what
is displayed here. Particularly let us say
we want to launch a bash shell which is not
an interactive mode. So, we could try that
out now here like this. So, if I type a bash
and I would type -c because I want to pass
on a command and I wanted to return back to
the parent shell. So, I would then do this
equal you now see that the bash shell that
was launched has less number of options and
it is not interactive.
So, which means that when we ran this command
child shell was created which had only one
action to do namely eco or type out the value
of the variable dollar hyphen and then it
exit. The reason why we use the backlash is
because while passing on this command to the
child shell we do not want to interpret it
already. So, we may now enhance this command
to see whether it is a child shell that is
responding to us by printing out those options
hBc.
So, I combine multiple commands using the
semicolon and you will see that what is responding
to us is actually this bash because the output
of the p s command is coming from there and
you can see that it says child shall spanned
by the shell that we are using right now how
do I know. So, double daughter says what is
the shell I am using right now. So, I am here
and this shell has spawned the other shell
which has actually then launched the ps command.
So, we may now want to inquire process Id
of the child shell echo double dollar then
echo. So, now you can see that the first command
has given me the output which is the process
Id of the child shell which is actually listed
here 11213 and the second command is giving
me the options with which the child shell
was launched which is hBc it is not interactive
and the third command is telling me the process
listing as it is displayed here in the next
three lines.
So, we have combined essentially three commands
using the semi column and that is actually
passed on to the child shell and we are able
to see that you could control the options
with which the bash can be launched. Let us
use the history command to understand one
of the flags with which the bash shell has
been launched namely h for history and get
the man page and it shows you that there is
a possibility to run a particular command
in the history by referring to its number
after the bank symbol.
So, when you type history you would see all
the commands that have been run in this particular
shell in the last several days and if I use
the bank symbol followed by a number that
particular command will be run. So, here we
have the date command with 1992 as the number.
So, I type 1992. So, bank 1992 would mean
the command date that is as per the history
should be repeated and that is what would
be repeated.
Of course it does not make sense if you have
commands that are too small that you need
to refer and type if you want to repeat a
commands that is a bit long to type it is
very useful. So, you can now see bank 2004
would repeat this particular command and you
would see that that particular command has
been repeated. So, it is pretty useful to
have this feature in the bash which is available.
So, when you inspect the value of the special
shell variable daughter hyphen then the capital
H that is there indicates that a particular
feature of referring to the history and being
able to run a command from the history by
using the numerical value of that particular
history line is made available. A couple of
words about the concept of expansion on the
shell we will delve into that deeper a little
later.
But for now let us look at the brace expansion
because that was one of the options that came
up with the list of flags when we looked at
the output of echo dollar hyphen command.
The capital B here corresponds to the brace
expansion option is made available. Let us
look at what does it mean. So, if you type
with two double dots characters which are
listed in the ASCII sequence will then be
expanded as per our need.
And if you type like this what it it means
is that you would get to the values from a
to z typed out and you could actually configure
this let us say from a to only l and also
from capital A up to capital K and so on.
You could also use them in combination with
each other A to D and then a letter after
that A D. So, you would see that all the combinations
of A to D as a two letter combination would
be listed.
So, this is what is called as a brace expansion.
There are many other expansion that are possible
the most common one is the wild card star.
If you type echo star it would give you the
list of all the files and directories in the
current directory which would mean that the
star expands to all the files in the current
directory. If you would type capital D star
it would list the directories that start with
the D which will actually mean that the star
would actually expand to what is possible
given the first character is capital D.
So, if you type capital D small o and the
star it would list only two of those folders
because it would expand to all those files
which match the pattern namely capital D small
o followed by anything that would actually
be possible in the list of files or directories
in the current directory. Now if you want
to launch multiple commandss on a single line
it is entirely possible you could actually
use the semicolon to separate of the commends.
So, let us say I want to type the ls command.
There is some output. I have the date commands
there is some output and then I have a command
called wc -l slash etc slash profile which
will tell me the number of lines in the file
called slash etc slash profile. There are
27 lines now I want to run all these things
in a single line. So, we could do that like
this ls and then semi colon and the date and
the semicolon and then wc -l slash etc slash
profile and then the semicolon.
So, the semicolon acts as a separator between
individual commands and you would see that
in one go you are running all the three commands
one after another in the sequence that is
left to right. Now you could actually have
spaces around the semicolon or not it is up
to us. So, you could have like this for readability
ah or you could also have it in a crisp manner
or you could also skip the last semi colon
and the output would be identical.
So, you can see that you can combine multiple
commands on a single line using the semicolon
which also means that as soon as the semicolon
is appearing on the command line it means
a new command has started. So, let us see
what happens if you combine with it in echo
command. Now you see that the first command
has executed after that the semicolon is interpreted
as a separator with another command.
So, therefore world becomes the command that
is being asked for and there is no such command
and therefore we have got an error. So, which
means that when you type like this it is interpreted
semi colon separating out this particular
line into two parts the first part is one
command which is echo hello and then the second
part is just the command called world. So,
that really is there will be an error because
there is no such command available.
So, if you happen to type something like that
then you will see that the first part executes
as echo hello the second part executes as
ls because ls is a command by that name and
therefore that output is given and look at
the difference between this and the line that
I am giving you. So, without the semi colon
the entire string is interpreted as a what
is to be printed on the screen and therefore
the output actually is very different.
So, this semiconductor is a very important
special character interpreted by the shell
as a separator between commands. Let us explore
the exit codes or written codes in the bash
environment. So, if you type dollar question
mark then it would give you an integer on
the screen an integer between 0 and 255 which
indicates a written code of the previously
executed command.
If it was zero it would mean that the previous
command was successful and if there was an
error in the previous command then it would
have a value from 1 to 255 depending upon
what type of an error that is. So, let us
intentionally make commands that will not
succeed and thereby inspect what would be
the written code or error code. When a type
ls slash blah there is no folder called blah
in the root directory and therefore there
should be an error and you see that there
is an error.
So, we can go back to the root directory and
look at the files or folders that are there
in the root directory there is no folder or
file called blah and therefore it should give
an error. So, when I ls slash blah and then
it has failed. So, now if I type echo dollar
question mark then it would give me another
court corresponding to the way the previous
command has exited.
And therefore the eldest slash blah has exited
with code two. So, the two indicates that
it was having a failure. Now let us go to
the root folder and try to create a file here
which we do not have permissions for. So,
I will try to create a file called file one
here I do not have permission. So, therefore
I get an error and now I could actually inspect
what was the error code and you see the error
code is one.
So, it means that zero is a code for success
one is when the parameter is denied and two
when there is a certain other error of a failure
because such a path did not exist. Now I am
in my home directory I create an empty file
call file one and inspect the permissions
and you see that there are no executable permissions
for the empty file called file one and as
we have seen with the date command you could
execute it from the location where the file
is present using the shortcut for the current
directory as dot.
So, you could do like this and it would try
to execute but there is no executable permission
you would have an error. Now you could actually
inspect what kind of an error code that was
and it would be an error code 126. The error
code as per the documentation is when the
command has failed because the file could
not be executed. Now let us say we are tripping
a command and we made a typo and therefore
such a file does not exist and therefore there
should be an error.
So, let us say I am supposed to type date
but uh I would create a type and type it as
daet and it would take a couple of seconds
to actually look through the system and then
say that there is no such file and through
a message saying that such a commands was
not found. So, what was the written code for
the attempt that we did just now? You see
the written code is 127. So, the 127 written
code is reserved for situations well the file
was not found.
Let us say we are executing a program and
we exited from it by purchasing control c
then you could also see that the error code
would be different one. So, what we would
do we will try to run the command sleep thirty
but we will not wait for thirty seconds we
would try to kill it with control c and then
try to see what was the written code and you
would see the written code is 130.
So, again 130 is a written code reserved for
situations where you have interrupted the
process by pressing control C. Let me try
a situation where the process is running in
another location on the same computer and
I am trying to kill that particular process
and then we inspect what would be the status
of the error court. So, the terminal app is
pretty useful in that sense I have this icon
here in the corner to launch a tab. So, we
have got a new tab here. So, in the new tab
I am running a command top.
So, you see that the top command is running
on the new tab and in the old tab I can inspect
what are the processes that are running in
the computers. So, I type ps and you see that
it does not list the top process because it
is a separate shell however it is on the same
computer. So, we can actually see it by using
the -e command which is listing all the processes
in the computer that are running and sure
enough you can see that the top command was
running here it has a process Id 12748.
So, I would go ahead and kill that process
by passing on an option called -9 which is
to basically kill that process okay when I
do that and type ps -a I see that the process
is no longer there and when I go to the other
tab you see that the shell is now back to
the control on the screen the top command
is not running. So, which means that I could
not inspect the status of the previous command
and it says the it says the code is 137 which
means that the exit code.
137 is reserved for processes that were killed
not by pressing control c in the same shell
but by sending the -9 option to kill from
another shell. Let us explore situation where
the exit code of a program is an arbitrary
number but that we would use bash as a program.
So the process Id of the bash that I am using
is 15083. Now I would launch a bash shell
now by passing on some commands.
So, one would be to print the process I d
of the child process and then to list the
processes that are running in the child process
and finally to exit with a particular record
which is three hundred as an illustration
now you could see that from the output the
parenthood is with the PID number 15083. The
shell that we launched now is with the paid
15315 as you can also see that 15315 is a
child shell launched by the parent shell bash
with the id 15083.
We exited with the code 300 and if we inspect
what was the exit code you will get the number
44 and this is because you are taking the
model of width to get the exit code. We can
try the same thing with any other number.
So, let us run the same command and we give
a big number and see what happens and you
get an exit code that is 215. Now we want
to confirm whether this is ok.
So, we would use a bench calculator to do
that we will start bc and 4567 modulo 256
and you get the answer 215 and I can come
out of the bench characteristics by pressing
control d. So, either come out. So, this is
an illustration to show that you can actually
have any arbitrary exit court except that
the number has to be between 0 to 155 and
therefore you would have the modulo of 256
being taken for any arbitrary exit code that
you may want to throw from the programming.
And we have illustrated this using bash shell
program itself. Why do we need to learn the
exit codes. This is because you have different
situations while running multiple processes.
Sometimes you just want to run the processes
one and two after each other without worrying
about the exit course. But if there is any
dependency then you may have a situation where
you want to run the first process and went
to successful only then you want to run the
second one or you may have a situation when
you have the first process and if you did
not succeed as a plan b you may want to run
the second process.
So, you can combine two different processes
on a single command line while also taking
into account the exit codes of those processes.
And you can combine these not just with a
pair of processes but many, many more on a
single line of command. We will look at that
in detail in the following session.